it's 1300 hours GMT that's 300 p.m in
Gaza Qatar has confirmed Hamas and
Israel have agreed on a temporary truce
in the besieged territory this
development comes after weeks of
negotiations mediated by Qatar alongside
the US and Egypt the Israeli government
approved the deal after a lengthy
cabinet meeting and despite divisions
among ministers the polls is expected to
start on Thursday morning but prime
minister Benjamin Netanyahu says the
agreement does not mean the war will
stop and a statement released by The
Qatari Ministry of Foreign Affairs on
the social media platform X says the
state of Qatar announces the success of
its joint mediation efforts undertaken
with Egypt and the United States between
Israel and Hamas resulting in an
agreement for a humanitarian pause the
starting time of the pause will be
announced within the next 24 hours and
last for 4 days days subject to
extension here's what we do know about
the deal it involves the release of 50
Israeli women and child captives in
exchange for a temporary 4-day Seas fire
Israel is willing to pause hostilities
for a further day for every 10
additional captives released by Hamas
under the deal it's believed about 300
trucks of humanitarian Aid including
fuel will be allowed into the strip
during the 4 days Israel has agreed not
to fly drones for 6 hours a day in the
north Hamas was concerned Israeli air
operations would be used to gather
further intelligence during the
temporary Seas fire also in the
agreement we believe about 150
Palestinian women and children will be
released from Israeli jails Israel has
made it clear no one convicted of murder
will actually be
freed well during the temporary ceas
Israeli media say Palestinians who fled
to Southern Gaza will not be allowed to
return to their homes in the North and
the most depressing part of all Israel
says it will resume its bombardment as
soon as the temporary truce is
over mersan Basin is a former Israeli
negotiator who's now the Middle East
director at International communities
organization he warns some complications
might arise from implementing the
deal the deal isn't done until it's done
and there are so many complications that
could be involved particularly with
regard to the ceasefire opportunities
for either side to shoot at the other
opportunities for Israel to collect
intelligence information I mean just
imagine what would happen if the
Israelis suddenly discovered the
location of yahir or other leaders from
the Hamas command would they wait or
would they go and take action if there
are Palestinians from the north of Gaza
who are relocated in the South now
decide to use the next five days four or
five days to try and go back to their
homes and there are parades of hundreds
of Palestinians walking by foot are the
Israelis going to allow them how will
they stop them um we we know that when
Hamas will release the hostages they
will probably use multiple convoys of
identical Vehicles while Israel will try
to trace the location of where these
hostages might have been held there
there are all kinds of difficulties and
complications that could happen we have
to keep our fingers crossed and pray
that it all goes smoothly because if it
does there could be a fifth day and a
sixth day not all the women and all the
children are being released and not all
the women and children prisoners are
being released so there's an opportunity
to add on to the existing agreement
without having to renegotiate something
new which will be again more
difficult well we have correspondents
across the region covering the story Zan
basravi is in Naas in the occupied West
Bank Rory Chalin is in occupied East
Jerusalem on the political divisions in
Israel but first let's start with Hashim
aabar he's here to discuss the
Diplomatic side of things so Hashim
there is a a big question of course we
understand this truce is supposed to
come into effect tomorrow that's at
least what's being reported but
according to what you understand from
the K mediators was there a specific
time fixed in this truce deal the that
is the general consensus that it is
going to happen tomorrow they do
understand this is a crucial moment
extremely the most delicate and this is
this explains the cautious optimism that
you can see in the statements made by
senari officials when when you say this
is what they this is you're talking
about Kat officials this is what Kat
officials understand right exactly and
the and and the cous optimism about the
first few hours of the deal are going to
be the most decisive moment okay hang on
hold that thought I'm going to come to
you in a minute about the but since
we've got you on the point of when this
starts I think it's an important
question on the minds of of a lot of
people Palestinians waiting to see if
they'll get some relief and also perhaps
families of Israeli captives let's bring
in Rory challeng as I said he's live for
us and Rory what I want you to reflect
on what Hashim said was that's the
understanding of the K mediators is that
the general understanding and the
signals we're getting from Israeli
officials is that this truce is going to
start tomorrow is everyone on the same
page here or not in other words
Rory yeah they're pretty much on the
same page that tomorrow is going to be
the first day in which you will see a
lull in the fighting as to exactly what
time that's going to occur well the
Israeli media has been reporting that
they think it's going to be about 6:30
am local time that's slightly different
from what Hamas uh have been saying
which is they think it's going to be
happening at about 10:00 a.m. local time
so a difference of you know a few hours
but still tomorrow morning tomorrow a.m
is when pretty much everyone thinks that
this is going to kick in in Earnest you
have also of course the the timings for
the first release of of captives and
when that's going to happen there is a
belief that that we might see a list
being produced by Hamas of the first 10
or so captives given to the Israelis and
that again tomorrow you might see the
first uh captives making their way back
to Israel okay that's a good point I'm
going to come to Zan in a moment but
Hashim I want you to pick up on the
point you were just about to make about
the first few hours are crucial what
happens there now if you see the
statements made by the Qatari officials
qatar's prime minister and the
spokesperson of the Ministry of Foreign
Affairs and also mammad who is the top
negotiator in the Qatari team that has
been negotiating this deal they're
basically insisting on the need for this
to move forward saying that the path
forward is going to be extremely
delicate for a simple reason as we speak
now and this is according to a senior
Hamas official the list of both the
captives and the Palestinians prisoners
have been exchanged so Hamas is looking
into the final list as we speak now
before saying let's go ahead and this is
the same thing for the Israelis when
they officially announced the seiz fire
this is where it gets extremely
extremely delicate you have the southern
part of Gaza and this is where some of
the most important movements is going to
start to happen when it comes to members
of Hamas taking the captives all the way
towards a certain point to be handed
over to I because I can see hash and
we're getting into the process which I
do want to get into in a minute but you
touched on an important point there
about looking through the lists agreeing
on those names we got got to bring in
Zayn cuz Zayn is standing by life for us
in Naas and understand Zayn when
Palestinian prisoners are released
they're going to the West Bank right
that's the understanding how crucial
will it be that the those who are
released are the are the people that the
Palestinians are hoping will be
released I mean Sammy what you're
talking about is a numbers game that is
not in favor of any of the Palestinians
either on or off the list we've been
speaking to members of uh family members
of those that have been held from nablas
eight of the names on the lists that
have been making their way between the
Israelis and the Palestinians eight of
them are women from Nablus the total
number of women being held in Israeli
custody is around 89 only 33 names of
women are on that list and even out of
those 33 it has not been confirmed to
any of the families by the Palestinian
prisoner Society or any other official
body whether they will definitely be
released or not so here it's a waiting
game we've spoken to people who are
pessimistic they've been here before
with other family members you can trace
generational trauma in the occupied West
Bank across the occupied territories in
the sense that multiple generations of
people have been imprisoned in Israeli
jails they've been here before and they
say they won't believe it until they see
it we've spoke to others who say they're
very very optimistic we were just in the
home of a woman named t 29 years old her
parents say that her uncle was in prison
when she was born that's how she got her
name taher meaning Freedom or to set
free and she will if she gets out be
meeting a niece who was born when she
was in prison okay so it is a very
intrinsic issue people being in prison
in prison is a very intrinsic issue for
Palestinians across a very sensitive
issue obviously on the Palestinian
Street Hashim back here in the studio
take us through the
process what the QI mediating team
understand is the process what's
supposed to happen who guarantees that
everything goes by Clockwork the qataris
the Egyptians and the Americans are
going to be the main guarantors of this
deal and this explains why for example
Samy since yesterday we saw only one
statement from the Qatari government we
saw the spokesperson also talking
praising the deer but staying very
cautious because they do understand it
is going to none of them are there on
the ground right and you were just
beginning to say talk about people being
released from one point in Gaza um
handed or moved further north I mean
what is the mechanism for that they have
they they have their teams operating for
example in the rafah crossing it's going
to be a crucial point in this agreement
they will be liasing with the Egyptians
who will play crucial role in the
Handover of the captives and they are
leing with the American at the same time
so this is what is happening and this is
why Samy briefly why it is an extreme
one perhaps of the most delicate
operations that we we we're going to see
Hamas is insisting on no fly zone in the
southern part of the country of of Gaza
Strip for a reason they don't want to
see Dr drones flying over detecting the
the movement of their own people and
they're insist on have they got that
guarantee from the understanding that
you of the officials that you've spoken
to with the Kat mediators that there
will be no AAL activity in Southern G I
tell you what they say it's a fast
moving fluid situation we'll only take
it the moment it starts officially
kicking in there is great deal of
anxiety although there's optimism there
is great deal of anxiety because of the
complexity of this operation what is
happening Sammy is this you will see the
movement of the pris of the captives and
the prisoners you have to ensure that
the northern southern part is going to
be no fly zone uh a data a 6-h hour dat
time no fly window that starts from 10
a.m. to 400 p.m. according to Hamas
senior officials just a while ago is a
necessity for the movement of the people
otherwise this is not going to work okay
that window you're talking about is in
the north of G in the hang on stay with
me here Rory I want to bring you back in
those sorts of details from your
understanding from the signals we're
getting from Israeli officials has that
been agreed to no fly zones in the South
6h hour Windows of No Fly zones in the
north and what about the legal process
let's not forget all of this Clockwork
uh mechanism that I'm chatting about
with Hashim does that take into account
the legal process that Israel is going
through in order to clear names for
release well I mean as Hashim was saying
there a lot of this is being worked out
kind of in a very short space of time
and so legalities are the kinds of of
things that aren't really being
necessary at the moment you basically
have two governments well at least you
know these government and uh Hamas
trying to work out what is acceptable uh
for both parties what is acceptable for
uh people as well now in terms of uh
releasing of prisoners uh that has to go
through a certain amount of vetting of
course and the names that the Israelis
have of Palestinian prisoners who are
going to be part of this deal yes they
need to be looked at and the Israelis
have to uh be you know comfortable that
these people are not serious serious
offenders uh and by that you know the
main criteria has be put on it is they
cannot be murderers but there are people
uh mainly women who are in that list who
have been accused of attempted murder uh
stabbings and the like and there are
plenty of teenage boys who have been
accused of throwing stones and rioting
and and lesser crimes like that so
essentially the main criteria for the
Israelis on this is no murderers to be
included in that list of course on the
other side when it comes to legales of
the captives that Hamas is going to be
releasing well Israel has no control
over that essentially Hamas will come up
with a list every day of 10 of their
captives women and children and they
will give those to the Israelis and the
Israelis would except effectively take
those uh captives back as and when
they're released by Hamas but they don't
have any control over who exactly is
going to be released at what time right
so this is clearly a a very much a
process that will be working day by day
it sounds like right Hashim what about
Aid what has been agreed do you know or
do we know from you when you speak with
the cuty mediators how many trucks will
it include fuel I spoke a half an hour
ago to an aid worker from the
Palestinian red Cresent who said her
understanding was fuel will not be
allowed to go to hospitals what are you
hearing it it has not been decided yet
tuno he one a senior Hamas official just
a while ago he said that they are
expecting to see 200 to 300 trucks
Crossing into to Gaza on a daily basis
including trucks that are going to be a
trucks carrying fuel that has to go
everywhere including hospitals on that
they're saying this Hamas fish telling
you that's what they're expecting or
that's what's been agreed this is what
they are expecting it's not been
finalized and this explains why Samy as
we speak the reason why you're getting
this sense of uh uh cautious optimism
about this deal is that even when they
agree tonight this is where we think the
final agreement about the tiny details
will be made tomorrow they will go to go
to the ceasefire each pretty much
concerned about what's next one final
thought here Samy since yesterday it's
the top leadership of Hamas which is
coming publicly talking to the media
about the details of this agreement why
they don't want to be seen as
gumblar it if fails massive destruction
in the in the Gaza Strip huge loss of
life you cannot come out to the people
and say we have a deal and then come
back to them two days later and say it
totally collapsed they they do
understand it's going to be an
extremely delicate situation situation
for just let's briefly go back to zann
because zann you're in the West Bank
when we talk about the needs of the
Palestinians from your discussions with
Palestinians talk us through what their
needs are when it comes to food fuel I
mean we're talking now about 2 to 300
trucks I think that's about half what
the daily average was before October the
7th
right that is correct people continue to
tell us
that the obvious absolute atrocities
being carried out in Gaza their friends
their families people here feel very
connected to what's happening there they
say that what they watching happening
seems absolutely impossible to Fathom
and out of control and the help that
needs to be going in simply is not
enough and will not be enough going
forward anytime soon what has been
cleared through the UN through the
Israeli government to go in through the
Rua Crossing whatever the delivery means
it is an absolute trickle compared to
the help they were receiving before the
bombardment started and absolutely not
enough compared to what they need to
receive now when you speak to people
here in the occup West Bank they say
that their leaders haven't been doing
enough they say that the International
Community has failed them and they say
that no matter what happens next even if
their conditions improve as long as
there is this Israeli Chokehold on the
occupied territories as long as Israel
is able to do whatever it wants in
Palestinian communities be that in Gaza
or in the occupied West Bank something
common we've heard from several people
is they describe a sense of incomplete
happiness so even if they have their
families back with this prisoner
exchange even if they are able to move
forward somehow their happiness will
remain incomplete as long as these
atrocities in Gaza continue to be
carried out all right let's thank all of
our correspondents Hashim aabar here in
the studio we've got Zayn of course and
Rory thank you so much for coming
together and pooling all of your
Collective knowledge and contacts and
insight into this try and help us to
understand exactly how things are
supposed to unravel going forward thanks
so much